---
title: "About Me!"
date: 2019-02-24T17:29:59-08:00
disableComments: true
---

# Introduction

Hi there! My name is Wael Nasreddine, a Lebanese-born Sillicon Valley Software
Engineer (or SWE), Site Reliability Engineer (or SRE) and Software Architect.
I'm currently employed by [KeepTruckin](https://KeepTruckin.com) as a Principal
Architect in the Platform team, in charge of the core products and the
infrastructure.

# Background

# Career Biography

I've started learning development at the age 12. I owned a Casio Graph 100 back
then, and I've learned C and assembly in order to write programs for it. As
someone who yearns for knoweldge, I've experimented with many different angles
of Software development. I've hacked mobile phones, designed and wrote
websites, wrote backend applications and APIs, and managed servers as pets and
later on as kettle.

As a teenager, I worked as a computer technician at a local company. That
taught me a lot about the machine at the hardware level, and allowed me to
expand my understanding of a typical program and the path such program must
follow. And one day, in the late '90s, I got exposed to Linux, my operating
system of choice for my workstation since 2001.

Linux, in many ways, had an important impact on my carrer. And for that I think
it deserves it's own section in my career biography. In the early 2000's, I've
decided to replace my Windows OS with Linux and after trying different
distributions, I've settled on using Debian. In 2005, I discovered Ubuntu which
was at the time an innovation on top of Debian, and became quite invested in
the project, and took on the task of a beta tester and a forum moderator.

At the age of 18, I moved to France to get my education done
